From Hansel minutes.com. It's Hanselman.
That's a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
your show number 554. In
this episode, Scott talks with
Sophia Abdullah about new ways
to think about interactive computing.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
about Sophia Abdullah, who is
the maintainer of interact and
a data scientist. I'm doing
great, Scott, how are you?
Lovely. Thanks for chatting with
me today. I've been watching
your stuff online and you
have more side hustles and
more cool stuff going on
than most people have in
their day jobs. As I'm
a perpetual hustler, You can't
stop and you take it
on another new project recently.
Yes, I have so interact.
It's it's, it's not I
N but it's just the
letter N interact is a,
a, is a popular literate
coding notebook. You've got almost
500 stars on a, on
a good hub here, and
it's not just interact, but
it's a whole kind of
family of sub projects underneath
it. But what is it?
Literate, coding notebook. That's a
great question. So a literate
coding notebook is a document
that allows people to have
markdown texts, so textual content,
narrative stories, and along with
that code, that's executable and
embedded. So you, if you
have a computational narrative that
you want to share, you
can tell that narrative and
back it up with the
code that follows. So if
we think about a lot
of the really interesting things
that are going on in
data, journalism and scientific computing
and interact is the perfect
place for all of that.
It seems like this is
an instance of, of a,
of a general problem or
a general solution that I'm
seeing a lot more of
a number of years ago,
I saw an application called
Calca C a L C
a. Are you familiar with
Calca? So Calca came out
in 2013, and basically you
type some Mark down and
you type some Mark down
and then suddenly you type
an equation and then it
solves it, and then you
keep typing some pros. So
it would be as if
you were writing an article
about fixed rate mortgages, and
then suddenly in the middle
of it, there was a
equations that isn't quite mathematical,
but it's very mathy. And
it's just, it's an, it's
not, it's no longer a
document. It's a living breathing
notebook. Yeah, that's a, that's
a great analogy. And you're
right. It definitely is kind
of part of this larger
revolution that's going on in
computing, I think is computers
and technology and programming become
more involved in our lives.
And people become more proficient
users of technology. We start
to think of really interesting
ways to integrate them into
the way that we tell
stories. And it happens to
people like journalists and scientists.
My dream in the future
is that anyone who has
an interesting story, whether they're
working in civic tech or
whether they're an elementary school
teacher can use the power
of literate coding to share
that narrative and back it
up with computation. So starting
kind of 15, 20, 30
years ago, like we started
with HTML. And then there
was a time in the
middle nineties when we were
doing math ML, but Matthew,
Mel was just a way
to like render something, but
it didn't really live. It
was just a picture. You
know, when did things go
from, when one of the
interactivity get, you know, get
injected into the conversation? Was
it JavaScript that needed to
make that happen? I think
the inactivity really happened when
the web came to be
the modern web as it
is, I think. Yeah. Yeah.
The JavaScript friendly web And
to kind of put, interact
into perspective and explain some
of the history behind it,
the predecessor or the grandpa
of interact is a technology
called Jupiter notebook. Jupiter notebook
was developed a couple of
years ago and it's entirely
written in JavaScript on the
front end, uses jQuery back
when jQuery was very popular
and it relies on this
messaging protocol called the Jupiter
messaging protocol that defines how
an interactive front end can
communicate with a backend that
provides the actual ability to
execute the code. So you
provide the front end. That's
like the pretty cells, the
editing interface, all that fun
stuff. And there's a kernel
as it's called on your
machine or on a remote
server. That's responsible for executing
the code that you sent
to it. And Jupiter was
the project that really laid
the groundwork for this kind
of interactivity and this kind
of messaging between front ends
and back ends and interact
builds on that with some
more modern technologies. So we're
using react on the front
end for our components, and
it's entirely built in JavaScript
because we're a little obsessed
with that. And you might
be wondering, you know, it's
using react, but it's a
desktop application. Like in grade
seamlessly with my desktop, I
can click to open files.
I can have it on
my dock or on my
desktop. And that's because of
really cool technology called electron,
which I think kind of
speaks to the power of
the web. Electron gives you
the ability to package HTML,
CSS and Java script into
a desktop based application that
kind of runs a chromium
browser on your desktop. And
we use that to make
interact, integrate seamlessly with the
desktop. I like to say
interact as the best of
the web and the best
of desktops all in one.
Hmm. Yeah. We actually had
one of the originators of
electron on the show and
it Jessica. Yeah, she's awesome
lady. Yeah. About a 10
or 20 episodes. It goes,
people can check that out.
So going back a little
bit farther in history though,
because we talk about, you
talk about how Jupiter and
that's Jupiter with a Y
instead of an, I just
kind of like the grandfather,
if you keep going farther
and farther back there was
I Python, which was kind
of like interactive Python, right.
And then the more general
concept of, of a ripple,
it seems like, like having
a rebel, like an interactive,
you know, redeveloped print loop
at the command line was
one was one early, early
thing, you know, 30 years
ago. But then when I
Python allowed you to, to
be manipulating something, graphical something
simultaneous, like you'd have your
text and then you'd have
your chart and you'd type
something in the chart would
change. That was when this
interactive notebook thing kind of
popped, you know, what you
think. Yeah. It's been sort
of a slow evolution you
started off with I Python
I Python was called I
Python because it was that
interactivity. But the kernel that
you can communicate with in
the backend was just Python.
So that limited it to
Python users and the kind
of jump from being called
Python to Jupiter. Wasn't a
change in technology so much
as it was a way
to communicate to users that,
you know, you don't have
to just use this with
Python. If you're working with
Julia, if you're working with
R, if you're working with.net,
you can use this interactive
platform to create interactive notebook
documents, and then interact just
kind of continues that vision
and brings it to the
desktop and adds a couple
of fun stuff to it.
But yeah, I think this
is just something that we've
been progressing to as people
who think about what's the
best way for programmers, scientists,
researchers, to use computers, to
share their stories. And really
it's a way for you
to communicate something to your
computer and then get something
back really quickly and that
back and forth, making it
more seamless and natural and
informative every step of the
way. If you think about
a rebel, it's it does
the job, but it's not
the most informative infrastructure. If
you think of something like
a JavaScript, JavaScript based Trump
tent, that allows you to
have charts, Molossia other dynamic
components, you can get more
information about from each kind
of read evaluation loop, if
you think about it. Yeah,
no, I think that's a
great point. And it feels
like, so if ripples then
were for programmers, but didn't,
weren't expressive enough, weren't weren't
easy enough. And then Jupiter
started thinking about things and
for data scientists, do you
think that interact is the
kind of thing that could
become general enough that nontechnical
parent could find themselves using
it? Yeah, that was one
of our big goals with
the project and the reason
that we decided to make
it desktop-based the web is
King for a lot of
places, but I think most
computer users still rely on
desktop applications. They still use
word. They still use Excel.
And they really feel at
home working with application spaced
in the desktop that allow
them to integrate with things
like their menu bar in
Chrome, or they're a finder
or Explorer on windows. So
we want to bring that
technology to the user where
they feel most comfortable, the
desktop. And we also want
to focus a lot on
user experience. So anyone who's
listening, I strongly encourage you
to go download the interact
alpha release and play around
with it and just experience
how seamless it is and
how natural it feels to
use something. One of our
big focuses was making this,
something that was accessible to
the sounds terrible, but like
the lowest denominator of technical
users. So we wanted somebody
who was nontechnical to be
able to figure it out
really quickly, and somebody who
was highly technical to be
able to be extremely productive
in it, because it has
such a low barrier to
entry. Interesting. Okay. So when
I think of, again, we're
trying to be respectful that,
you know, it's not bad
to be a nontechnical person.
It's just technical person. I
think of like, I, I
always think of nontechnical parent,
and I know that nontechnical
parent or nontechnical business user
can use Excel. And like
Excel has almost kind of
taken over the world, which
is a good thing in
a bad thing, but, but
it's still very, you know,
it's grids and it's charts
within grids and things like
that. Are you thinking that
that business user could, could
move from the kinds of
things that they're shoehorning into
Excel and maybe consider interact
for that? Yeah, I would
hope so. And I think
even a better way to
think about it is as
a connection point between say
data scientists and affirm and
business analysts and affirm. So
say you're a data scientist,
you're working on some computation,
you're building a model. You're
thinking through something, you write
up your thoughts and your
narrative in a single notebook
file. You email it over
to a business analyst or
a manager at your firm
who might have minimal knowledge
about what you're doing and
might just want to be
up to date about what
it is. And they can
open that document as they
would a word document and
engage with it. And I
think the possibilities for a
platform that connects highly technical
data, scientists, researchers, et cetera,
with nontechnical users is so
powerful because it's really bridging
that knowledge gap between people,
that communication gap between people.
And that's where I think
it comes in most handy.
I see. So it wouldn't
be that I would give,
like, my wife is a
business analyst type person. She's
got an MBA and she
understands things. I don't, I
would make a notebook and
I P Y N B
notebook. And then I would,
I would create that structure
and then send her that
file. And she'd receive it
as a document, just like
she gets a word document.
Yeah. And if she had
interact installed on her machine,
which hopefully she would cause
it is cross platform. So
anyone using any operating system
can use it, all she'd
have to do is double
click that email and it
would open up on her
computer and she could read
it, change the code if
she felt super brave and
daring, or just look at
the results that you sent
her. Interesting. Okay. So when
did you get involved with,
with this project? Cause I
see that it's been around
for a little while and
there's lots of committers, but
when I look at the
chart, it sounds like there
was a, there was a
moment when you got pretty
jazzed about it and suddenly
your commit graph got bigger.
Yeah, that's a great question.
So I got involved with
interact in mid May, 2016. I
got involved with the literate
coding ecosystem in general, in
August of 2015, when I
started contributing to the Jupiter
notebook, which is, as I
mentioned previously, the grandpa of
interact. And since I got
involved with interact in 2016,
I've done a little bit
of everything. I do development.
I manage the Twitter account.
I do some writing for
the blog. I write grants
so that we can get
funding for open source project.
I work on community management.
I figure out how to
get into conferences to speak
about the project. I'm kind
of like a Jack of
all trades in that respect.
Well, certainly those people are
needed. Like I see lots
of people who go and
do some open source and
they maybe write the core
bit of code and then
they commit it and then
they wonder why no one
comes to their site. You
know, someone sent me a
project recently to look at
and they wanted me to
tweet about it and share
about it. And, but they
had no read me. They
had no website. They hadn't,
they had no getting started.
It was just colored. And
it sounds silly to say
that, but you know, get
cologne is kind of a
big, that's asking a lot
of me as the person
who just visited your site.
That's one thing I think
a lot of people fail
to realize in my perspective
of open source is that
it's a lot like running
a startup or a business,
except that you don't make
any money and you also
don't get paid, but you
do have to have the
ability to market your project.
You do have to have
the ability to understand who's
going to take the biggest
advantage of my project and
be able to leverage it
in interesting ways. And how
can I get ahold of
those people and get them
into using it in their
business, sponsoring it or any
kind of engagement. How do
I engage with the community?
How do I publicize my
project? How do I get
funding? All that good stuff.
It's basically like being a
little entrepreneur. And that's what
I love about it is
I do have this entrepreneurial
side to me and being
an open source allows me
to activate that and energize
it every day. Not ask
a lot though, of people
like, for example, this is
a project that's currently kind
of buy in for data
scientists, but now you're describing,
you know, managing a Twitter
account and making sure the
read me is clean and
making sure the docs are
good and has an attractive
website. Yeah. That's a skills
that maybe they don't have.
It is a lot. And
I think with open source,
you can do as much
as you feel comfortable doing.
I'm the kind of person
who loves to be involved
with all kinds of different
things. I don't want to
be just the programmer, just
the developer. I want to
be the marketer and the
social media manager and the
writer and the dev evangelist.
And I have the space
to go crazy with all
that and open source. Nobody's
going to stop me and
say, no, Safia, you can
only to submit PRS and
review PRS and that's all
you're going to do. And
likewise, there are other people
on the project who do
chest stick to development because
that's what they're most comfortable
with and that's their talent.
And that's totally okay. So
the open source, you can
go as far as you're
comfortable with and just make
it your space to be
a great developer, a great
writer, a great manager, a
great marketer. It's kind of
your playground. And that's, what's
so fantastic about it. I
think that I don't like
to use the word unicorn,
but sometimes you're kind of
describing a unicorn in the
sense of, I don't know
how many data scientists that
could also do all the
things that you just described.
I might be a bit
of a unicorn, But your
background is mostly in data
science. Like that's your, that's
your space that you're most
interested in, right? Yeah. I
got really interested in data
science when I was 13
years old, I was a
total documentary geek and I
came upon this documentary about
the Google search engine. So
describe the early days of
Google and how they built
it. And I got really
interested in search engines and
started researching align to information
retrieval, which is the general
field of building search engines
and got like fell down
the rabbit hole of learning
about machine learning and AI
and natural language processing and
all that fun stuff. And
ever since then, I've just
been completely obsessed with the
power of the field and
even more so in this
kind of draws back to
my interests in building a
desktop application that makes research
and data science accessible to
common people. I'm interested in
making sure that non technical
people or semi-technical people have
an understanding of what data
science is and what machine
learning is and what its
role in our world is
cause it's everywhere. And the
scariest thing for me is
to live in a world
where machines are doing things
that impact us, that we
don't understand. So I work
hard to kind of teach
people about machine learning and
I do free workshops in
Chicago and all that fun
stuff, because I don't want
the robots to take over
Skynet, preventing Skynet is so
that's interesting because you're, you're
saying that it's open source.
That is the thing that
will prevent us from taking
these, these, this software for
granted. Like if you know
what it's doing, you don't
have as much fear over
that thing. Yeah. And it
doesn't even have to be
open source if you just
have an understanding of how
it works, that can go
a long way to making
you feel comfortable and making
sure that you're a more
mindful internet user. So I,
I would hope that like
in the future, everyone in
the world would understand how
search engines work and how
ads work and how Facebook's
newsfeed works. But the reality
is that most internet users
don't know that. And that's
really alarming to me. Hmm.
Backing up a little bit
and talking more about interact.
You called out very clearly
that there's the electron front
end. And then you referred
to this Colonel concept. And
when I initially set up
interact on my machine, it
said, you know, not connected.
What is the difference between
the kernel and the, what
does that was that concept?
Cause kernel is kind of
an overloaded term. Yeah, it
is. Colonel kind of is
one of those really technical
terms and it seems scary
and frightening. And I would
encourage everyone. Who's listening to
go to my website, which
is safia.rocks. I've got a
talk that explains how colonels
work and how the entire
Jupiter messaging protocol works. But
to give a brief summary
of it, a Colonel is
essentially a program that runs
either on your local machine
or in a remote server
that has the ability to
take messages as input, parse
them, figure out what to
do with them and send
a response back. Okay. So
this is in the context
of a Jupiter Colonel. Yes.
The context of a Jupiter
Colonel. And so what would
happen is you open interact?
Let's say, and you're working
in Python and you've got
your code cell, you type
in print. Hello world. Okay.
And if you have a
Python kernel installed on your
machine, that's the one catch
you do have to install
a Colonel since is it
a program what's going to
happen is that the frontend
is going to take the
code that you wrote, package
it into a little message,
send it over via zero
MQ, which is a messaging
protocol to the Colonel. The
Colonel is going to take
that message, parse it out,
figure out what you want
me want it to do
with it, and then send
the response back to you
to render. And that response
would be the text hello
world. So it's just a
way for a frontend and
backend to communicate with each
other. Okay. So then that
means that as a.net developer,
if I wanted to make
an interact notebook, I could
theoretically figure out if there
is a binding for a.net
and zero MQ. And it
turns out of course, that
there is one that's been
around for many years and
then I could type C
sharp code or F sharp
code or whatever makes me
happy. And then have that
one process, which is my,
basically my server side, but
it's really local to me.
Yeah, exactly. And you could
do that with multiple programming
languages. There's a rich community
of kernels in the Jupiter
ecosystem. So the popular ones
like Python and Julia and
our exist, I'm a bit
of a list piggyback. So
there is a common list
kernel for those who are
curious, there's Ruby kernels, there's
Haskell kernels. There's tons. If
you go around, you're guaranteed
to find a kernel for
the programming language that you're
excited about. Or if you
want to, you can like
build on and give back
to the community. And is
that some is the kernel.
Something like it doesn't come
with the Colonel, you get
that separately and you have
to run it separately. Yeah.
It doesn't come with the
currently have to get it
separately. We are working on
erotic to integrate the desktop
application with some default kernels.
It goes back to kind
of making it a low
technical barrier for users so
that you don't have to
install anything anymore. It just
kind of all comes in
one with a basic kernel
to start. You could even
have a Colonel gallery. And
I, you know, from within
interact, say, go and get
me, you know, Oh, that's
an interesting idea. Because for
example, if I load up
interact right now, it says
not connected. And it's like,
well, gosh, what are my
choices? What are my options?
I went to the file
menu, looking for like examples
and stuff like that. So
I started out looking at
there's an intro one and
it's really kind of cool.
It's like a web browser,
but you'll have a bunch
of texts and you'll have
images and you're like, Oh,
I'm on the web, but
then there's code and it's
right there. And it's, it's
syntax highlighted and it can
be run in place. Yeah.
It's super fun. Super fun.
And do you, do you
find yourself using this for
you? Do you mostly work
on it or do you
actually use it when you're
trying to explore a problem
from a data perspective? A
little bit of both. I
work on it sometimes when
I use it, I get,
it is an alpha project
currently. So when I use
it, I'll find a bug
and then I'll like get
distracted and end up fixing
the bug instead of working
on the thing I was
supposed to work on. But
like I said before, I
do teach data science workshops.
So I use it regularly
now to create the content
for my workshops in the
form of an interactive notebook.
Well, that's interesting. So then
are you saying that one
could sit down in data
science one Oh one set
this up and spend, you
know, a couple of weeks
exploring everything and this is
their, this is the browser.
This is the word and
Excel and everything all in
one place. Yeah. That's actually
a really great, perfect use
case for it is for
students. One of the biggest
deterrents for a lot of
people who want to learn
programming or learn something technical
is the setup involved, which
can be pretty complex sometimes,
but Jupiter is super easy
or sorry, interact and Jupiter
as well, which is the
grandpa is super easy to
kind of load up an
access. And do you see
this as an IDE? Is
this like the visual studio
for data science and people
would live and work and
spend eight hours in this
thing? I wouldn't call it
an IDE. I don't think
you would use it for
development per se. I think
a better name for it
might be an ice and
interactive communication environment. And the
idea is that you can
write content in this and
write code cells. You wouldn't,
you know, start off and
write a huge Python code
file in this. That's probably
better for Adam or VIM
or whatever code editor you're
comfortable with. But when you're
looking to integrate a lot
of pros and narrative with
code, this is the perfect
environment. Ah, okay. So this
gets me thinking about what
we're seeing in the world
of news right now with
like the Washington post, the
New York times, doing these amazing
interactive things. Someone has gone
and written the scripts, done
the data science, and now
it's time to translate that
into a format for normal
humans. Yeah. So this brings
up a great point. There's
a really popular use case
in journalism. Bus speed actually
does a lot of great
journalism work and a lot
of data driven journalism work.
And one of the things
they do is release a
lot of their data journalism
in the form of these
interactive notebooks. And you can
find them on bus feeds,
get hub organization. So if
you want it to maybe
a bus feed did a
piece of journalism that you're
really curious about. You can
go to their, get hub,
download the data file and
then open it up and
interact and play with the
data yourself and be your
own data journalist. Interesting. That's
funny because with all due
respect to Buzzfeed, I don't
necessarily have in the past
thought about them as being
a news organization, but what
they are is a, a
new digital organization and they're,
they are pushing the boundaries
of what we think of
as being journalism. And they're
playing into the whole kind
of interactive computing and illiterate
coding experience. Very well. They're
good translators. So then these
notebooks can be shared easily.
And when someone says, here
are the facts, they could
write an article about it,
or they can just say,
here's the notebook play with
it yourself. Yeah. So one
of the things that we
integrated into interact right now
is the ability to publish
a notebook directly, to get
hub as a guest. And
hopefully in the future, we'll
be able to add the
ability to publish it to
a medium post or a
WordPress blog or any other
kind of resource or web
platform that you have. So
really does start to become
a content authoring platform and
a communication platform. Being able
to publish it to medium
would be, would definitely lower
the barrier That is on
my to do list of
things I want to do.
Cause it's a feature that
I'm really excited about. I've
been meaning to start publishing
a lot of my data
explorations online, but sometimes it's
such a hassle taking a
notebook I've been working on
and getting it to the
web, being able to just
hit file, publish medium and
have it up would be
amazing. No, I, I, I
do want to tease you
a little bit because I've
never heard it pronounced kissed,
and now I feel like
there's going to be a
hard G soft G fight,
another gift gift, another gift.
Yes. This is something I
constantly have. I pronounced Jif
as Jif. And I guess
you're one of the Jif
people. I just found you
Scott, we need to stick
together because there are some
roll of gift people out
there Just mean including the
event, including the inventor of
the format, which is also
wrong. No. Oh my goodness.
I can't believe it. Yeah.
But I say, I say
just, I didn't know. And
I didn't want to be
attacked by the hard G
crowd on the internet, but
yeah, No, no, no. They're,
they're really a brutal crowd.
In fact, they're probably going
to stop listening to the
show now that they've had,
now that this interview is
falling apart at the end,
now We've just discovered what
a terrible person I am.
I pronounce things with a
soft G. All right. So,
so what I'm hearing is
that when you, when you
all decided to make interact,
you wanted a nice desktop
experience with, you know, a
native desktop experience. And it
looks great on windows and
on Mac. Okay. You wanted
in app support, you wanted
publishing sharing should be easy
and you didn't want it
to feel like a terminal.
Cause it doesn't feel like
a terminal. It feels like
you're writing a word document
and there's just code in
the middle somewhere. And it
really is quite minimalist. There's
no toolbar. It is almost
like a, you know, speaking
of medium, it almost looks
like medium except with data
and code in the middle
of it. Yeah. It does
adopt the minimalist philosophy very
well. And now you're saying
that you're gonna, you're gonna
do for the future. What's
the, what's the roadmap publishing
the medium. What else are
you gonna add? Great question
for anyone who's listening, you
can check out our get
hub or we've got a
repository called initiatives and that
lays out some of the
future plans for work we
have on the project. I
can go through a couple
of the big initiatives. The
first is real time collaboration.
And that's in addition to
writing the stories ourselves, we
often write the stories in
teams. And so wouldn't it
be great if I could
open up a Jupiter notebook
and interact and you could
open up the same notebook
on your machine and we
can work together on it,
the same way that we
would in Google docs or
any other platform that has
real time collaboration in it.
So that's one of our
being initiatives. Another is integration
with get the version control
system. And that's because a
lot of people want to
be able to track changes
in the content they produce
and be able to back
it up the same way
that you would code. So
we want you to be
able to kind of add
and commit straight from the
desktop interface to a get
repository. And then perhaps have
it backed up on GitHub
or Bitbucket to be shared
with your team in some
way. Oh, one of our
other initiatives is I mentioned
this is built using react.
So the idea is to
expose all of the different
components that we use and
interact. So the other people
can build their own interactive
notebooks using our components. So
if you want to have
a component, that's a code
cell in your project. You
can pull it in. If
you want to have a
component, that's a markdown cell.
You could pull it in
any of the components you
have. We have would be
publicly available as packages for
people to use. So those
are three big initiatives, real
time get integration and then
exposing a composable ecosystem for
other people to build on
top of Very cool. And
so folks can check out
interact@nteractinteract.io, and people can check
you out and your stuff@sophia.rocks.
So rocks is actually your
top level domain. That's pretty
fabulous. The best $10 I
ever spent. 10 bucks. Yeah.
You know, there's some other
aspiring data scientists named Sophia
out there who is pretty
mad at you right now.
Oh gosh. Sorry. I hope
she's. I hope she doesn't
pronounce G with a hard
G She's a hard G
person and we don't care
about her. Thanks so much
for chatting with me today.
Thank you for having me.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week.